---
layout: video_tutorial
title: Product Comparison Tutorial
subtitle: Product Comparison
tags: screencast gastrograph producer panel dashboard tutorial
date: 10/03/2014 12:00:00
author:
  - Jason Cohen
description: The third screen-cast tutorial for the Gastrograph Producer Panel—Product Comparison
redirect_from:
 - /learn/tutorials/Producer-Panel-Product-Comparison-Tutorial.html
---

{% youtube DykqTtSIcPQ %}

Hi everyone my name is Jason Cohen, I am the founder and CEO of Analytical Flavor Systems. My company makes tools for statistical quality control, focusing on coffee, beer, and premium spirits. Today I am going to be giving the Gastrograph Producer Panel screencast tutorial, on how to use our product comparison panel, and while I give that, I'm going to be drinking a New Belgium, Rampant Imperial IPA, so shout out to Lindsay in their sensory department.

All right, so were on the Gastrograph Producer Panel. This is your main dashboard. We're going to be looking at data from a fake brewery, not going to give away any of our clients data here, called Cool New Brewery. This company has three products, Awesome Double Bock, Mediocre Pills and Pretty Good Amber. And over here on our nav bar- if we click over to flavor profile comparison, this allows us to do three primary things. You can compare batches of your own product, or you can compare two of your own products that they're very close in flavor profile. You can compare them if theyÕre not very close in flavor profile but it won't tell you nearly as much. You can compare your product to your competitors, or your friend's products. If youÕre looking to do a collaboration, if you're looking to move in on someone else's territory on their Super Triple Imperial American IPA. And finally, you can do styles and references. And this works the same in coffee and this works the same in spirits- all these options are available.

So, in products let's compare Awesome Double Bock's most recent batch to the batch before. So, we're looking at July and August- August on the left, July on the right. And you can see that there are some differences. The intensity scores in most recent batch were quite a bit lower. The PQ's are the same, clearly Styles are the same, same beer. But this could be an important difference, and if you're seeing these types of difference a lot. If you're seeing these types of fluctuations a lot, our quality control management panel- it'll call you, it'll text you, it'll tell you that this is a serious and significant deviation. Or it might be that you only have 10 reviews 1 month and 16 reviews, another month, your panelists change, and there's really not that much of a true underlying chemical difference, right sensory chemical profile difference in your beer, in your coffee or your spirits.

If you click over to other products, this allows you to compare your beer, to see the object flavor profiles, of again all of your friends, and competitor's beer. So, Dogfish Head 120 Minute IPA that scores really highly. Let's take a look at Rampant, the beer that I'm drinking now. Clearly, awesome beer, has PQ 4 out of 7. That's in the high eightieth percentile. Intensity is actually just below average for the amount of flavor present in it. Averages hovers around 35 for higher-end craft beer, and that's based off only 7 reviews, so cheers. And finally, if you click over to styles and references, you can compare Awesome Double Bock to any other to other Double Bocks.

So, Awesome Double Bock, this is a made up beer, fake data that generally conforms to style. You can see that the Average Double Bock is quite a bit less intense, its a little bit lower in perceived quality, and has a more reasonable flavor profile. You're not seeing all of the spikes in pinwheel shape. So these panels, and the entire idea behind this is that it's your product. This allows you to get an idea of what's going on batch to batch. About what's going on production cycle to production cycle, and if you have enough data, you can start to see some long-term trends in here. Where you can also say, well this was a particularly good batch, a particularly bad batch, and if you produce two products that are fairly close, say you produce, these are not fairly close, say you produce a standard stout and a coffee stout, and all you've done in the coffee stout is add coffee to it, you'll be able to see really how that's what that's adding to the flavor, how that's changing the flavor profile, and if it's really is too close, or if you really have gone created you know a distinct beer. You might be better off calling it, you know your coffee stout, whatever the name of your coffee stout is.

In other products, the idea behind this is that you really don't want to produce anything too close to your competitor's beer. If you're not distributing in the same area, if you're trying to get inspiration that's great, but the way the market works is that people are looking for unique and distinct and recognizable flavor profiles and raining on someone else's parade isn't going to do that for you, but at the same time you can get that that inspiration. It's good to see what else is out there, what other people like, what scores they're getting. And this is the only information that you can see inside the producer panel from other companies, and other companies can see about you- Just the standard objective flavor profile and we actually remove all flawed, contaminated, or deviant batches from that, so no one is seeing you know your beer if there's a diastole contamination, if there was a batch variation, because that wouldn't be a good representation or true representation of your products flavor profile. Well, that's my time for this one, if you have any questions you can email me [JasonCEO@gastrograph.com][email]. That stands for Chief Executive Connoisseur, or I am also available by phone. There's links everywhere on the website to contact me- I would love to hear from you.

[email]: mailto:JasonCEO@gastrograph.com
