---
layout: post
title:  Quality Control in Beer Raw Ingredients - Other Additions
date:   2014-12-22 09:29:18
tags: beer quality control raw ingredients other additions
author:
  - Ryan Ahn
description: Part five of a series of quality control in Beer production.
---
## Other Additions: The special flavors of Beer
This is part 5 of the series of the five part series on quality control with Beer Raw Ingredients

<div>
<a href="{% post_url /blogs/gastronexus/2014-11-20-beer-quality-control-raw-intro %}">Introduction</a><br>
<a href="{% post_url /blogs/gastronexus/2014-11-24-beer-quality-control-raw-water %}">Part 1: Water</a><br>
<a href="{% post_url /blogs/gastronexus/2014-12-01-beer-quality-control-raw-malt %}">Part 2: Malt</a><br>
<a href="{% post_url /blogs/gastronexus/2014-12-08-beer-quality-control-raw-hops %}">Part 3: Hops</a><br>
<a href="{% post_url /blogs/gastronexus/2014-12-15-beer-quality-control-raw-yeast %}">Part 4: Yeast</a><br>
<strong>Part 5: Other Addtives</strong><br>
<br>
</div>

It is fairly common for brewers to add other ingredients to improve the flavor of their beer. But it is important to take into account how these additions change both the chemical and biological processes that occur throughout the beer production process. Do their positive attributes outweigh potential flaws they can create?

<!--more-->

#### Malt Extract
A possible addition to beer is malt extract. They come in a variety of colors and range drastically in quality. One commonality among all malt extracts is that they hamper the rate of fermentation. This is because they have significantly lower quantities of free amino nitrogen when compared to malted grains. Free amino nitrogen is a critical component in yeast fermentation. Therefore “watering down” the amount of free amino nitrogen by using malt extracts will slow fermentation by slowing the yeast’s metabolism. This can affect attenuation during the fermentation process and should be taken into account when designing a beer.

The quality of malt extract has significant implications on the fermentation and the taste of the final product. Lower quality malt extracts often utilize glucose syrup, sucrose, and corn syrup. These contain simple sugars and/or sugars that can change the fermentation and potentially lead to off-putting flavors generated by the yeast. Higher quality malts contain large quantities of the sugars found in malted grains, such as maltose, maltotriose, and dextrin carbohydrates. If malt extracts are utilized during beer production, it is advisable to only utilize extracts with primarily maltose, maltotriose, and dextrin carbohydrates, and with relatively low amounts of glucose, fructose, and sucrose.

Malt extracts come in two forms, dry and liquid malt extracts. Each is equally effective, however the use of dry malt extract is better. Malt extract is very susceptible to color change. During wort boiling or any other type of heat exposure where water is present, malt extract will undergo browning reactions. It will begin to form melanoidins, which are flavorless dark pigment molecules.

However these reactions also occur at a slower rate during the storage of liquid malt extract. Liquid malt extract also is very viscous and much more difficult to measure than dry extract. It is a very important quality control measure to understand how malt extract affects the chemistry and biology of the beer during production and how that can influence the flavor and color of the beer.

#### Sugars, Fruits, and Spices
Brewers will also decide to add other sources of sugar to their beer to achieve a target flavor profile. Common additions are fruits, honey, spices, and molasses. These additions often contain a lot of sugars. Due to the fact that the addition of sugar greatly impacts the fermentation process, it is advisable to add these ingredients with caution and never let them exceed 10% of the total amount of fermentable material.  Whenever utilizing fresh fruit, it is critical to thoroughly clean the fruit. **Fresh fruit can be dirty and could introduce a microbiological contaminant that could adversely affect the fermentation of the beer.**

<table class="table blog-table table-striped table-hover">
<tr>
<th colspan="2">Ingredient</th>
<th>Flavor</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>

<tr>
<td colspan="2">Honey</td>
<td>Flavor is largely dependent on the variety of honey utilized. But it always imparts that unique, floral, honey-like aroma and flavor.</td>
<td>Consists of mostly simple sugars and should therefore be utilized sparingly.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td colspan="2">Molasses</td>
<td>Molasses leaves sweet flavor that resembles dark unprocessed sugar cane. Its flavor is deep, earthy, and dark.</td>
<td>Molasses is a byproduct of sugarcane. It is naturally ocurring and is separated during the sugar refining process. It can be purchased in light, medium and dark grades.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td colspan="2">Lactose</td>
<td>Lactose leaves a residual milky sweetness on the tongue.</td>
<td>Lactose is milk sugar that is not a yeast-fermentable sugar. It is often utilized in stouts.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td colspan="2">Raw Sugar</td>
<td>Contains few flavor-producing impurities unlike honey and molasses.</td>
<td>Contains mostly sucrose and is highly fermentable.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td colspan="2">Maple Syrup</td>
<td>Leaves a caramel and woody finish on the palate</td>
<td>Maple syrup contains mostly sucrose but its impurities give it its maple wood taste. Most mass-produced maple syrup is mostly corn syrup, and "waters" down the maple flavor.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td colspan="2">Citrus</td>
<td>Adds a crisp and clean fruitiness</td>
<td>Common citrus fruits utilized are oranges, limes, and tangerine. The peels of citrus are also commoly utilized.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td rowspan="5">Common Fruit</td>
<td>Apple</td>
<td>Adds a distinct apple-like sweetness and aroma</td>
<td>Apple juice is commonly used</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Apricot</td>
<td>Adds a fresh peach-like flavor and aroma</td>
<td>Often added as a puree</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Cherry</td>
<td>Contributes a tart cherry sweetness</td>
<td>Often added as a puree</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Watermelon</td>
<td>Adds a creamy light fruit flavor to the beer</td>
<td>Often utilized as a puree or rind. Watermelon rinds will impart a pleasant sourness</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Pumpkin</td>
<td>Pumpkin additions have become more and more popular in recent years and add autumn reminiscent flavors and aromas</td>
<td>Mashed pumpkin is commonly utilized</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td rowspan="4">Common Spices</td>
<td>Vanilla</td>
<td>Imparts subtle creamy and sweet aromatic notes</td>
<td>They are fairly versatile and can complement many different styles of beer</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Cocoa Nibs</td>
<td>Contribute dry bitter dark chocolate flavors and aromas</td>
<td>Often utilized in relatively smal quantities as to not overpower the beer</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Cinnamon</td>
<td>Imparts a classic cinnamon stick taste and aroma</td>
<td>Commonly used in holiday beers, cinnamon complements other fruit and spice additions</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>Coriander</td>
<td>Adds complex nutty and citrus notes</td>
<td>Often lightly crushed before use</td>
</tr>
</table>

Only use dry malt extract that consists of primarily maltose and maltotriose

Approach additions such as fruits, sugars, and spices with caution and be sure to thoroughly wash all fruit before it is used

Limit the use of high-sugar additives to less than 10% of the non-malt fermentable sugars
