---
layout: post
title: Building a Balanced Quality Program
tags: craft beer quality software control assurance improvement
date: 2015-05-12 17:39:23
author:
  - Zachary Bushman
description: Gastrograph | Balanced Quality Programs
---
####Quality
Quality is essential to any successful brewing operation.  High quality and consistency in a beer builds trust with customers.  It assures them that you care not only about your product, but that you care about them.  Even a single tainted batch can ruin a producer’s reputation.  Bad beer even has the potential to harm the craft brewing industry as a whole.  Imagine if the first craft beer you ever tasted was tainted with butyric acid (tastes like baby vomit). Therefore, quality programs are important not only to protect yourself but to protect the entire industry.  A bad batch destroys trust, and customers will, very likely, no longer buy beer that they have had a bad experience with. The importance of a quality product cannot be overstated, but what is quality? According to the Brewers Association a quality beer is:

<blockquote style="margin: 25px 0;">
  <p>“A beer that is responsibly produced using wholesome ingredients, consistent brewing techniques, and good manufacturing practices, which exhibits flavor characteristics that are consistently aligned with both the brewer’s and the beer drinker’s expectations.”</p>

  <footer>Brewers Association, <cite title="BA QUALITY SUBCOMMITTEE SETS VISION, MISSION, DEFINITION OF “QUALITY BEER”"><em><a href="https://www.brewersassociation.org/industry-updates/ba-quality-subcommittee-sets-vision-mission-definition-quality-beer/">BA QUALITY SUBCOMMITTEE SETS VISION, MISSION, DEFINITION OF “QUALITY BEER”</a></em></cite></footer>
</blockquote>

<!--more-->

How can a brewer ensure that they ship a quality product every time?  The answer is by employing an effective quality program.  Quality programs can be broken down into three parts: Quality Control (QC), Quality Assurance (QA), and Quality Improvement (QI).

QC programs are in place during post-production. The purpose of quality control is to make sure that a flawed product never reaches customers.  This is done by testing finished products to detect any present or latent flaws, taints, contaminations, batch-to-batch deviations and decreased shelf life. QC results in the removal, re-evaluation, and possibly the destruction of the product.  This can be expensive in terms of time and resources, but the protection it provides for brand reputation is well worth it.  It is the responsibility of a quality control program to identify and detect any flaws that have developed during production.  Some factors that need to be monitored in QC include: packaging fill levels (headspace), ABV, and sensory and/or chemical analysis for flaw detection.  It is important to keep good records of these measurements in case of an audit or a missed bad batch.  Documentation helps in finding out what went wrong and why.

A successful QA program monitors the product during production to find and detect flaws or contaminations before they become a problem.  QA begins with raw materials and ingredients.  Before brewing it should be made certain that all equipment, ingredients, and materials are fresh, clean and meet all quality standards.  Quality assurance should be predictive and proactive.  If a flaw is suspected, it should be monitored and actions should be taken to correct or mitigate any flaw that has occurred or will occur.  Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) are a huge part of QA.  SOPs are used to make sure that every step in production is being carried out in a safe, effective, and consistent fashion. In addition, sensory testing can and should be carried out between each step in production to allow for the maximum amount of opportunities to catch a developing flaw.  Even things as simple as having employees report any off-smells in the brewery may save a batch of beer.

Once a brewery has a quality program that includes both QC and QA, then it can start to focus on QI.  Through systematic examination of processes and results, QI is used to constantly improve products, process, and overall quality.  The purpose of a QI program is to identify and fix causes of problems or potential problems.  All QC and QA data should be recorded to help with QI.  QI includes things like preventative maintenance and product development, and is essential for the growth and development of a brand.

Quality programs can be further broken down into two more categories: chemical analysis or sensory analysis.  Chemical analysis is the detection and identification of flaws through chemical means such as probes, sample titrations, chromatography etc.  Sensory analysis is using people to taste the product at different points during production to find flaws.  As always, there are both pros and cons to each.

####Chemical Analysis
Chemical based quality programs use instruments, reactions, and observations to determine and identify flaws, taints, and contaminations in beer.  When used correctly, a well-developed chemical analysis program can indicate what compounds are in the beer and in what proportions.  The “gold-standard” instrument set-up used to find data like this is a gas chromatograph coupled with a mass spectrometer (GC/MS).  The gas chromatograph (GC) separates chemicals based on their chemical affinities under different conditions.  The mass spectrometer (MS) is then used to help identify what chemical is represented by which peak on the chromatogram.  This instrument set-up is highly accurate, but due to the complex nature of the analyte, beer, the process of using a GC/MS can take a long time, often as long as a few days. As one might expect, a high degree of accuracy is anything but cheap.  These instruments can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars.  In addition you need to have trained technicians to run the instruments and interpret the data.

Chemical probes can be used to monitor production conditions in real-time.  In most cases these probes are not as sensitive or selective as a GC/MS.  Also, chemical probes have not been developed to detect every compound of interest in beer.  These probes can be used to measure things like pH, temperature, dissolved oxygen and CO2, and concentration of select ions.  Chemical probes cost significantly less than the GC/MS.  All of the probes mentioned above, along with the accompanying meters, cost less than $10,000 and are much faster than GC/MS.

Chemical probes fall into the category of quality assurance because they are used during production to monitor production conditions and product quality.  The data collected is used to prevent and mitigate any flaws that may arise.   GC/MS can be used as both QC and QA by testing products at select points throughout production to find flaws before the beer is completed.  Due to the time required to carry out GC/MS, it is better suited for QC.  Testing the finished product to make sure it is free of taints flaws and contaminations.

####Sensory Analysis
Sensory based quality programs use the human palate to find flaws, taints, contaminations, and variation between batches.  There are a few different options when considering sensory panels in quality programs.  Sensory evaluations fall into three categories: difference tests, descriptive analysis, and affective testing.

Difference testing is a fast and simple test that requires that a taster determine if two samples are different.  This type of sensory testing is analytic because it seeks to show specific and objective differences in a product.   There are three main types of difference testing: paired comparisons, duo trios, and triangle tests.  Paired comparisons ask the taster to determine if there is a difference between two samples or if one sample exhibits more or less of a selected quality.  An example would be asking if Beer A is sweeter than Beer B.  The duo trio test is when a taster is given a reference sample to taste, then the taster is presented with two more samples (one of which is the same as the reference).  The taster must then try to identify which sample is different from the reference.  The triangle test is very similar to the duo trio test.  Tasters are given three samples (two are the same and one is different).  The tasters try all of them and must attempt to identify the one that is different.  Difference tasting is very simple and the data analysis is also simple due to its binary nature (taster is either right or wrong).  Difference tests require a large number of participants (min. ~20).

Descriptive analysis is an analytic test in which tasters rate the intensities of perceived characteristics of the product.  This method of sensory testing gives much more specific data in regard to what specifically is different about products and the degree of difference.  Multiple tasters are not necessary for descriptive analysis but often preferred to obtain more reliable data.  Small panels of trained testers are preferred for difference testing.  Though tasters need to be trained, the training level required can vary depending on the data desired from the panel.  Also panels can either be collaborative (where the product is tasted, the panel discusses the product, and then reaches a consensus on qualities and intensities) or individual.

The third type of sensory testing is affective testing.  Affective testing asks tasters to explain what they like or dislike about a product or how much they like or dislike a product or aspect of a product.  This type of testing is subjective by nature, therefore it is known as a hedonic test.  Affective testing uses scales like the following:

{% picture post-images post-images/hedonic-scale.png "(http://www.sensorysociety.org/knowledge/sspwiki/Pages/The%209-point%20Hedonic%20Scale.aspx)" %}

Affective testing requires a large number of participants, usually 75-100.  The data provided by these tests can be complex due to its subjective nature.  Also due to the subjective nature, the data from affective testing may be best utilized for marketing and product development.

Overall, sensory testing is quick, inexpensive, and gives exactly what is important, which is “How do people perceive the product?”  Although, sensory evaluation is not as accurate as some chemical evaluations, it can still be very accurate and provide valuable data.  It is also easier to analyze the data from sensory testing than it is to analyze data from a GC/MS.  Sensory data can be used as QC, QA and QI.  The production levels, product styles, and available time and money are major factors in deciding whether a sensory quality program or chemical quality program or a combination of the two should be used.

####Chemical and Sensory Quality Programs
A combination of chemical and sensory analysis is the epitome of a great quality control program.  Using both allows a greater understanding of and significance to data collected.  For instance, if chemical methods pick up a small amount of a chemical that may cause an off-flavor, sensory analysis can be used to determine if the difference will be noticed.  Conversely, if a flaw or other issue is detected by a sensory panel, data from this panel can be used to expedite the chemical analysis procedure.  By using the data from sensory analysis, the identity of the flaw can be determined, or, at least, the possible identities can be narrowed down.  It is much easier to find the concentration of a substance when its identity is known.

While chemical data gives an analytical quantitative measure of what is in a product, it does not necessarily help explain what the product will taste like.  Flavor is a complex sensation as compounds can mask the flavors of others, and some combinations of compounds can create entirely new flavors.

A brewery with a chemical based quality program can enhance their quality control program immensely by adding a sensory component to their quality program; just as a sensory program alone can benefit from the addition of a chemical based quality program - if the capital expenditure and employee costs are viable. Both are powerful tools; the data created from either a chemical or sensory based quality control program can be used to increase the quality of any beer. While being original and creative are important and respected traits in the craft brewing industry, consistency and quality are the key factors to longevity and success. If a brewer cannot consistently make a quality product then people will not trust the brand and will likely not buy the beer regardless of how innovative and original it is.

[The Gastrograph System][gastrograph] uses machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms to predict present or latent flaws, taints, contaminations, and batch to batch deviations in real time from human sensory data - without the capital costs of running a chemical based quality control program for every batch of beer. In our experience, a chemical based quality control program is best utilized when the tests and batches are prioritized by the results of cheaper, faster, and more effective sensory testing.

Quality improvement should be an ongoing progress for any brewer. While a brewery is inspecting the quality of products to make sure that no product will be shipped with flaws, taints, or contaminations, data should be collected and recorded. Data can be used to figure out what's going right now, what needs improvement, and goes a long way in improving the product and ensuring customer loyalty. Quality and consistency should be one of the most important issues on the list of priorities a brewer has. This helps to make sure that consumers will always receive a high quality beverage that they will return to in the future.

#####Sources:
  * Lawless, H.T. and Heymann, H. Sensory Evaluation of Food: Principles and Practices, 2nd Ed.; Heldman D.R.; Springer: London, 2010.
  * Newman R. “Integrated Quality: An Everyday Decision”; The New Brewer; Vol. 32, No. 2, March/April 2015, pp 52-58.
  * Perkins, J et. al, “Climbing the Quality Pyramid”; The New Brewer; Vol. 32, No. 2, March/April 2015, pp 42-47.
  * <a href="https://www.brewersassociation.org/industry-updates/ba-quality-subcommittee-sets-vision-mission-definition-quality-beer/">https://www.brewersassociation.org/industry-updates/ba-quality-subcommittee-sets-vision-mission-definition-quality-beer/</a>
  * <a href="http://morebeer.com/brewingtechniques/library/backissues/issue2.4/allen.html">http://morebeer.com/brewingtechniques/library/backissues/issue2.4/allen.html</a>
  * <a href="http://www.sensorysociety.org/knowledge/sspwiki/Pages/Duo-Trio%20Test.aspx">http://www.sensorysociety.org/knowledge/sspwiki/Pages/Duo-Trio%20Test.aspx</a>

[gastrograph]: https://gastrograph.com
